All times listed here are effectively "man hours" (albeit days, weeks,
etc), meaning they are an indication of how long the task will take
for someone to do rather than a fixed date in the future that I expect
them to be done. Obviously I cannot do all simultaneously. :-)

I'm sometimes wildly optimistic in how long things take as find
interruptions slow things down alarmingly.


Primary Gap5 Wish-list
======================
(functionality needed for use of Gap5 currently being supported only in Gap4)

1. Ability to add new data (eg. Auto-fin reads, finishing reads,
   capillary consensus and small data sets ie TIL reads)

   This is the most complex part of the primary list. It's not
   something I am willing or able to simply rip out of Gap4 either
   unlike some of the other algorithms, as this was the oldest part of
   Gap4 (with parts dating back some 25 years believe it or not!) and
   so is very tricky to move over. It's not even written in the same
   computer language as the newer code. (Fortran vs C)

   So essentially it's a new creation and I'd expect several months
   work. Maybe 2-3 months to get something solid.


2. Ability to create and export tags - PARTIAL

   They can now be created in my own test version, so once that's
   installed you'll be able to create new tags. It's not quite as
   featured as gap4 yet; it misses the ability to move or copy tags
   and tag macros aren't in yet.

   Export (and I assume the inverse, import) tags shouldn't be hard to
   write. I'd expect a couple weeks there.

3. Sequence search - DONE in editor (consensus only) and outside editor.

   There are multiple places for searching. Do you mean the actual
   Sequence Search function in Gap4's view menu, rather than the
   search by sequence mode in the contig editor?

   I've been working recently on one of the precursors to this and
   other things - speeding up computing the consensus via storing
   cached copies. This is now hopefully done, but needs a lot more
   testing.

   Searching it therefore should be relatively straight forward, and I
   ought to be able to more or less lift the old code from Gap4 with a
   bit of tidying up. So maybe 1 week. I'll see once I get going on
   this whether the old Gap4 code is compatible I guess.

   The editor search code is more work as it does a lot more and works
   in a different fashion that will likely need a lot of changes to
   make it compatible to Gap5. However the basics of searching in the
   editor would likely be another 2-4 weeks.

4. Ability to edit by read name - DONE

   In theory this already exists, it's just very slow to enable.

   The tg_index command has a -t option to index sequence names, which
   should then allow you to edit a contig by a reading name instead of
   a contig name. However I haven't tested it in ages so maybe there
   are issues still. I also need to do something about the speed of
   tg_index when using -t as right now it makes it grind to a halt on
   larger projects.

   To get a faster name indexing won't be easy to do, so either
   consider this as working now (barring bugs) if you're patient or
   using smaller projects, or 3-4 weeks for a faster more general
   purpose way. (Assuming my vague plans on how to do this actually
   work.)

5. Primer Selection

   Is this the semi-manual method within the contig editor?

   I hope this isn't too hard as the code in Gap4 was revised
   relatively recently (compared to most of Gap4). Assuming it ports
   over to gap5 without too many changes needed I expect it to be 2-3
   weeks work.

6. Find Internal Joins and Find Repeats - DONE

   Hopefully both of these are already there. Let me know if you need
   more.

7. Auto-prefin compatibility with Gap5

   This is a complex one. Like the manual primer selection, I'm
   expecting that the code in Gap4 can be edited enough to make it
   work in Gap5 too without requiring a full rewrite. However there's
   substantially more of it in the auto-prefin world, and it may need
   changes from Lars' team to do with the surrounding pipeline code
   too.

   From Gap4's side of things I'd say 1-2 months on this, given the
   number of things to test and knowing how long it took to get
   working correctly in Gap4.


Secondary Gap5 Wish-list (functions that would greatly improve Gap5)
========================

1. Disassemble Readings

   Well, in an ugly "make them vanish" sort of way I think this is
   quite easy. Doing it properly by actually freeing up the space used
   in the gap5 database is more work, but to be honest I doubt anyone
   would notice the difference unless they try to disassemble a huge
   proportion. (Gap5 also doesn't have the requirement that all
   reading numbers are values from 1 to Number_of_readings, so
   skipping old read numbers is fine.)

   I'd say something could be lashed up at least in 1-2 weeks,
   probably double that to be more satisfied with the methods.

2. Ability to see reads from one technology as a consensus that you
   can drill down into to see all reads.

   This is a long term thing that requires a lot of underlying
   features to be added, like a partial redesign of the contig editor
   window into a tree style view rather than just a list. It's
   therefore quite tricky to say how long it'll take until I at least
   get partially down the road.

   It's likely it'd be 2+ months work.

3. Exporting sub-section of consensus (possibly covered in Arcturus)

   If it's only the consensus you want, then in theory this is doable
   already.

   If you want more than the consensus, eg exporting the entire
   assembly as ACE format, then right now it's only doable by contig
   rather than region within a contig. (To fix that would be a few weeks.)

4. Improved template display

   How long is a piece of string!? There's small improvements and
   large improvements to be done here. To get something along the
   lines that I was thinking - like Gap4's consistency plot with
   sub-plots than can be added or removed, or Spin's overlayed plots,
   I'd expect a good month of reworking.

5. Preservation of contig ordering within gap and also from newbler scaffolds

   I think gap5 should have everything it takes to do this already,
   but perhaps a bug is preventing it from working.  It's possible
   also that CAF is breaking this as I don't believe it preserves the
   contig order, in which case it's not trivially solveable.

   To say how long it would take isn't easy therefore until I know why
   it's not currently working. It could be anything from 1 week to a
   couple months.

6. Navigation (using tags, problems, confidence etc)

   Ah, so this is the editor search I was thinking about above. As
   mentioned there, 2-4 weeks for the basics.

7. Separation and Viewing of Homologues

   Challenging! Gap4 already has it's haplotype code (SNP Candidates),
   but it was never really good for anything other than short regions
   due to the speed of it. Porting that as-is to Gap5 would be a few
   weeks work.

   Presenting it in a better fashion though probably also requires
   point 2 above - a tree view style contig editor - along with many
   further changes. That could take a few months to iron out and is
   definitely a more long-term thing.

8. Ability to view in/dels

   I'm not sure what you mean by this. Do you mean the ability to find
   them? They're explicitly "viewable" by the editor multiple sequence
   alignment, but are you asking for a way to plot them on, say, the
   template display?

9. Improve scrolling in editor window

   Can you please elaborate? Scrolling in X, in Y? I'm aware that the
   editor Y coordinates jump around while scrolling in X. I think we
   need a way to lock the sequence underneath the cursor to the same Y
   coordinate so there's a fixed visual position. That would be a
   couple weeks maybe.

10. Split-tags eg tagging of all exons of one gene with single connected tag

   Something else that's been on the todo list since Gap5 started, but
   likely long-term too. I don't think it's too hard to get the data
   structures sorted and for gap5 to store tags like this (it's almost
   already there), but figuring out how the actual mechanics of the
   tag editor would work are more challenging.

   Maybe 1 month to do.


External wishes
===============
dauria_giu@gva.es
	Implement the Find Read Pairs plot from Gap4.
